Bonnitta Roy - Six Ways to Go Meta by Emerge: Making Sense of What's Next • A podcast on Anchor

https://anchor.fm/emerge/episodes/Bonnitta-Roy---Six-Ways-to-Go-Meta-e4fve7/a-ahveiu

Daniel Thorson  0:11  
Welcome back to Emerge. Today on the show my guest is once again, Bonnitta Roy.  Bonnitta and I are going to be going into some deeply geeky territory, talking about six different ways that human beings can go meta. I found this conversation and this exploration to be really clarifying. [It] helps me make sense of the different ways that that term can be used, the different kind of moves that human beings can make, to go meta in relationship to the world. So this this one is very packed. We want to this may not be one of those episodes. You want to listen to it at double speed. If you can do that, then more power to you. But there's a lot packed in, there's a lot of information, a lot of insight packed into this conversation. And I'll also link to the presentation that this conversation is based on. You can find that in the show notes. Then another announcement. Danny J, who compose the outro music for emerge, has just released his new single, which is that outro music so if you have been enjoying the way that episodes have emerged, and you can now listen to that outro song anytime you want. His new album, which he composed, wrote, you know, created here at the Monastic Academy when he was a resident will be released on July 12. And you'll be able to find that at the same link at danieljw.com and there'll be a link to that as well in the show notes. Okay, please enjoy this episode of emerge with Bonnitta Roy.

The emerge podcast is proud to be sponsored by the Monastic Academy for the Preservation of Life on Earth. The Monastic Academy located in mobile Vermont, is a training center dedicated to the amplification of human maturity in the age of the Anthropocene. The Academy trains its participants through a unique combination of rigorous contemplative training, project based learning and a disciplined commitment to ethical behavior, all held in the context of deep community. The Monastic Academy is currently accepting applications for the apprenticeship program. This program lasting two or three months includes silent retreats, daily meditation instruction, and regular, authentic relating practices. This program is free. Other ways to participate include daily visits, week long retreats, or if you can work remotely joining the academy through the co-working program, allowing you to deepen your practice while keeping your job. For more information, you can go to www.monasticacademy.com

Welcome back to Emerge. Today on the show. I'm joined once again - who was one of my favorite people in the world increasingly as a result of the inquiry of the show - Bonnitta Roy. And we're going to be exploring a presentation that Bonnitta has recently developed that she showed me when I was visiting her at her house a couple months ago. It's called the Six Ways of Going Meta. That's 'meta' not 'metta' for you Buddhists out there. And I found this presentation is kind of electrifying and clarifying in that it was helping me to understand a lot of the territory that I've been exploring on the show, but and could could feel distinctions between the kind of characters that I was interviewing and the way that they were approaching some of the problems of the Anthropocene but couldn't really like nail what made them distinct from each other. And so I found this presentation, just, as I say, really clarifying. And then there's another piece of it, which is that I think seeing these six ways of going meta, as we'll explore, you know, helps us review Like which ways? Which minds? Are we very used? To? Which ways have we kind of grown accustomed to? And what alternatives are there? What alternatives are there for us in terms of participating differently in the world in terms of giving rise to new behaviors, new thoughts, new ways of being? And so I kind of wanted to open up this season of Emerge with with the conversation on this because I think it It adds a tremendous amount of kind of, like backwards context, actually, to the conversations I've been having. And I imagine forward context, like into the conversations I will be having, in terms of who's exploring which way of going meta. And and, and furthermore, why it's so useful to have access to these various, we might call them 'Meta Moves.' So Bonnitta welcome back to the show. And thank you for taking the time to share this work with us.

Bonnitta Roy  5:51  
Hi. Very excited to talk about this while you were speaking, I was thinking well, it's so fantastic to actually have an audience for this just shows how many people are really examining their own paradigms examining the way they're thinking about things and experimenting with that. So that's a big leap from even five, five years ago, I would say certainly from, like 10 years ago, so just just wanting to reflect on 'Good Work, Team Human!'

Daniel Thorson  6:27  
Yeah, it's so, uh, you know, one of the things you say in the presentation, which kind of again, I think you gave the specificity to a lot of intuitive senses that I have had, and one of the things you say is that the Anthropocene itself is a kind of driver for discovering new ways to go meta. And I think maybe that's what we're experiencing too is that people are kind of realizing the deficiency of some of the old ways of being the old minds, the normative mind that they're holding, and are looking for new ways to, to be to participate And so before though we kind of dive into some of the nitty gritty, I would love to hear you reflect on like, because I imagine Different people have different context for what 'meta' means. I think it's one of those words that people use, and they maybe don't actually have a really robust sense of what it means. What What does it mean to 'go meta?'

Bonnitta Roy  7:21  
Hmm? Well, there's really two broad categories that we can use to look at this term going meta. So the first category is something that we do as modern humans easily in conversation without knowing it.  Anyone who's written a term paper at the college level, has made this move many times and that is this ability to exit the context, the initial originary context. So for example, if you come up to sit come up to me just in a casual conversation and say, Wow, something trivial about the weather. "Oh, you know, it's supposed to rain tonight." And instead of me just being in that context and say, Oh, yeah, really? I say, "Oh, it's interesting. You ask about the rain." And now all of a sudden, I'm in this other context, right? And then I say, because weather is something that everyone you know, now I'm talking about this other kind of context about when and why and where people talk about the weather, and maybe that's a project I'm doing. So I've exited the actual invitation that you've given me, right. And we do this all the time. And, and it's kind of we were, we're inhabiting a context. And the next thing you know, we're inhabiting a new context, in which the previous context is contextualized at a larger kind of conversation or something. And so if I, if someone says, What do you think of Elizabeth Warren's proposal for.. decreasing student debt? And then all of a sudden instead of answering that question ago, you know, Elizabeth Warren Yeah, you know, her and Bernie Sanders and the democrats and blah, blah, blah. So, I've just taken that, instead of inhabiting that conversation, I've made it a piece of a larger context. So I've got gone meta on it. And even everywhere on Facebook Book posts, you see this, you'll have an opening post, and then you see the commentary thread, going meta in many different ways. 

So this is a easy way to understand the first category of going meta, I think, audience knows we do that. So this is kind of an unconscious way. So 'flipping contexts' I use all these different contextual levels. Slide so that but what my presentation is about is more of the second way which is a little more sophisticated. And that is 'the ability to create an observational gap between the mind or the text or the context and, and your thinking process.' Now, if you look closely, the first way of going meta, actually requires a mind that can do this because the unconscious slipping there's some kind of a gap that is created between the initial content and where the mind has taken it. But I wouldn't call it an 'observational gap' because it's unconscious. So going meta in the second way is being consciously of taking the initial context and looking At it knowing that, oh, let me push that off a little and then look at it, and then comment through my second level or second degree reflection on the context that I'm looking at. And we call that an observational gap. It's commonly called from Robert Keegan, a 'subject-object move.' So the subject and the blending, in the first instance, becomes moved out as an object for the new subject to talk about. In my work, I want to avoid the term subject object move because not every way of going that makes an object on the other side, when you when you create the gap, and then you're thinking about the other side. You can make an object of it, but you can discover the gentle agentic in participatory nature of the other side. And so it's more of a 'subject-to-subject encounter.'

Daniel Thorson  12:02  
And, and maybe I would love to hear you reflect a little bit about why it is that the Anthropocene is functioning as a driver to force us to discover new ways of going meta.

Bonnitta Roy  12:14  
Yeah. So I don't want to say in a trivial way, some people say like, rah, rah, the Anthropocene and all this destruction is an opportunity for us to evolve as human beings. You know, I'm not sure that the trade off is positive in that in so much that way. I think what it shows us is that very, very rarely do people and perhaps never do, humans as a species actually changed this drastically, actually evolve this radically without the participation of the world without something pushing and driving them. We don't think ourselves into new and cool ways of being.' This is true for rare people, artists and saints and geniuses, innocent creative geniuses, but in general, it's the movement of the world, the changing of the conditions. You know, humans have survived different ice ages and different catastrophes, and also different areas of flourishing when we discovered oil and we had all this energy in a bottle. This was a event that created positive "trophic cascades" brought in the industrial revolution. So I think that you can call all of these techniques or technologies. 

Part of it is human technique and technology part of it is the world itself. The world discloses itself as an affordance for what we would call positive meaning. Happy and comforting and pleasureful change and also as an affordance for change because things are getting discomfortable and dangerous and critical and threatening. So I think it's our it's a sign of our participation in the world and a lot of people define the Anthropocene as you know, humans are the dominant species on the planet. But I think it's really, we're, we're being forced to realize that we cannot dominate the planet, that we've never been separate, that what goes around is coming around. And so I would hope people start to think of the Anthropocene as the commitment of the world to do its part in worlding us and it's very clear that the Earth, in the climate in the biosphere, move us, move us to do things like change our mind to migrate all over the world and really embark on trying to solve things that matter to us. So just bringing the world back into it is a critical component of the Anthropocene. So maybe the Anthropocene is not a great term for this era.

Daniel Thorson  15:16  
Okay, yeah. And so and so the first way of going meta that you mentioned you refer to in your presentation is 'meta synthetic,' and just for listeners as a kind of reference point, it's really helpful for me, at least to know of thinkers who are, you know, famous for doing this kind of move. So, two examples that you had in the presentation, were folks like Hegel, or Ken Wilber, who kind of took things that existed, and then kind of looked at what was common among them and then create a new context in which they could make sense out of all of the objects that they were looking at. And so for Hegel, that's the thesis antithesis, synthesis move to Wilber, that's famously the 'transcend and include move,' but what you also say the presentation is that there are certain deficiencies of the metasynthetic move, that are kind of perhaps part and parcel of causing us to like look to other ways of going meta to help us make sense of the complexity of the world or the kind of condition of the world. And so you mentioned 'runaway epistemologies,' 'hyper objects,' and 'over mining' I don't know if you want to kind of paint a picture about like the deficiencies of the meta-synthetic before we kind of look at maybe some of the more novel meta moves that you've been looking at.

Bonnitta Roy  16:32  
Yeah, so I think you hit on them all if we look at Ken Wilber's theory, for example, and many I think of our listeners have some knowledge or familiarity with his (Aqua?). Well, Ken Wilber said there's four basic contexts. Right? There's the singular internal, the subjective context.  There is the plural, internal share the intersubjective context. There's singular objective and the plural objective. And so these are for contexts, or four native views that people can be at. And then of course, he reportedly is then saying, I'm not going to be in any one of these contexts are going to take a step back and say, Well, here's these four contexts. What can I say about them? So he's creating a new context in which to talk about these four native contexts. And he's calling it integral theory. And he's applying theories of change on these contexts.

It's kind of so so so what happens is it gets even more complex because now I'm in a view that has to simultaneously remind myself simultaneously include all four contexts, in every approach to every situation, so that's one part of the meta-synthetic is that it gets very complex really fast escalates complexity. And then of course, you see, in the early days of integral theory, I'm an Associate Editor of Integral Review would get all these submissions. And instead of for context, you had these cubes and these hyper cubes and these quadrate cubes, and these fractals of cubes, because people were doing the same move on wilbers move. And we never published any of them because there's something quite neurotic and obsessive about the mind that does that. And so the meta-synthetic escalates complexity. It also gives you a false sense because, let's say even Wilber doing this move on these these native perspectives. He fails then to ask himself well, what perspective do I hold gives the impression that he's holding the perspective from or from nowhere or that he aperspectival. And, and so, so his own perspective is untouchable in some sense, right? So this is kind of an illusion of the meta-systemic move. But it's also the move that creates this infinite regress. Because once you realize that the complex perspective that you're coming from, can itself be contextualized. And you pop into yet another deeper perspective, and it kind of goes on forever. 

So, that's kind of like what happens when I've watched happen over the last 10 years or so. But the other other challenges from meta-systemic is one, they exit their own domain. So there's this great book written by Sean Esbjorn-Hargens called Integral Ecology. It contextualizes in all the known ways that people address the ecological problems, but it's not it doesn't itself do ecology. So that's that's, that's one of the challenges with going meta, meta-synthetic way. The second is this challenge that I talked about in my paper of 'over mining.' You keep mining more and more complexity until you end up with a conceptual objects such as such as climate change, which is the hyper object. It's so complex, you can't actually manipulate it with reasoning faculty, and you end up in a kind of state of inertia. That's a problem. And then over time, this creates it's just another term for 'runaway epistemology,' that that the way you talk about things gets more and more and more complex, but continues to get further and further from actionable impact. And yeah, so it kind of seems to be Yeah. It's, I believe that we are at the point where many people are recognizing it for the kind of dead end or inadequate epidemic move.

Daniel Thorson  21:13  
Yeah, yeah. And and, and it bears repeating that this is an has been the most common meta move in human history. It that's accurate, right?

Bonnitta Roy  21:26  
Yes. And I think that in you know, in small dosages, it was it's very, it's very powerful. You know, there are many situations in which let's say we're doing government policy and as we're doing policy with friends, we go 'Wait a second, we need more diversity.' So I'm going to pop out go meta, try to understand that from that perspective, then bring more diversity in and then get back on to the work of doing the program. So and, you know, what do they say too much of a bad thing. Never creates a good thing. But too much of a good thing quite often results in a bad thing. And so the promise of meta, I have students that come out of, like, for example, in this case, the New School in New York City, and they come with minds that are capable, so much meta-systemic complexity, and that, that you can see as they're talking from this view, it holds all these contexts, but then they're gonna hold another context from that view, and on and on and on. And to. I have to dis-employ them of their own own skill and talent really, in thinking this way, by really, actually going meta on that kind of thinking. So if you can get people to do that, they can see Wow, what am I doing, I'm just creating this complex mental model of every feedback loop. I can think of, and there's actually no end to that epistemologically. What we want, we may try to find the end is we're just a world ends, you know. But in terms of epistemological complexity, there's no end to that. And that's when it maybe epistemology actually exists the world itself.

Daniel Thorson  23:22  
Hmm. Yeah. And so yeah, I think it bears saying that none of these meta moves are problematic in and of themselves. And really, I think the invitation that I received from the presentation is like, oh, there's like six different, at least six different ways of kind of doing this meta thing. Maybe it's appropriate to learn how to be fluid between them and kind of leverage them when appropriate. And also to just acknowledge that there are other ways of being in the world other than the meta-synthetic which you know, isn't it used to be quite comfortable for me as the kind of major way but now I've been obviously at the monestary playing more with the second move that you talked about, which is the deconstructive meta move, which does it didn't immediately make sense to me why this would also be a meta move. And so maybe I wonder if you could sort of explain how this fits into your your view of the meta move. This deconstructive path.

Bonnitta Roy  24:18  
Deconstructive meta move is certainly associated with the eastern path in some post modernism like Derrida, Foucault, Derrida and Foucault and that is that you take the existing way of looking at the system and you deconstruct it down to well on the eastern path to 'emptiness,' you see that nothing stands on its own or you remove all the linkages and of course, when you remove all the linkages of a co-dependent arising system such as thought, well then it disappears. So it's a meta move because it requires creating an observational gap. Right? So when you're doing meditation, early meditation is really to notice when thoughts arise before you can then manipulate them and deconstruct them, you have to, you have to have these objects, these, these, these relationships that constitute your internal experience, you have to be able to see them, to witness them to observe them. And so all these meta moves in the second category, which are which the first of the first two categories I talked about when we first started talking require this observational gap, whether it's conscious or unconscious, and in in as I understand meditation, there's an attempt to do practices that makes it conscious. 

And then you can consciously start working downwards through the deconstructive path, and removing these internal linkages between thoughts and effects and mental models and imagery and perception, you start removing these linkages in a somewhat systematic way to continuously unravel the complex knot of experience until you're left with subtler and subtler objects that also can be absented or bladed. Until you experience they're either they're non arising or some conceptual, somewhat conceptual insight about the nature of interdependent reality. So, this is .. also called negative dialectics in contrast to Hegel's dialectics and there's just a tidy this sort of, there's actually different ways people in the eastern traditions have dealt with this. So yeah, you know, I like to say that, for example, Nishida Kitaro. He He worked with the with the dialectics more like matter and antimatter, that they kind of destroy each other like it's a proposition and its opposite destroy each other. It's so cool. It's so cool because in the in the West a proposition in its in its opposite or contrary, create a higher perspective. And then Nagarjuna actually, you know, he actually came to more of an insight on emptiness. And Dogon worked with these kind of deconstructive moves to create a whole illogics which is quite hard to penetrate. But there's it's neat that there's like these different flavors of the deconstructed move in the East.

Daniel Thorson  27:49  
Right. And so it's easy then to contrast this deconstructive meta move with the meta-synthetic in the sense that the meta-synthetic is kind of up path of discovering novel contexts and broader context bigger contexts that include the objects within them. Whereas the deconstructive path is kind of almost like the movement in the opposite direction, right? Where you're using the same kind of objects that the meta-synthetic mind works with, but using them to kind of deconstruct to lower and lower levels of complexity is that the kind of accurate way of saying it?

Bonnitta Roy  28:26  
Yes, so, in terms of Foucault and Derrida, they were doing that just with linguists, linguistics and language. But Buddhists all over the world realized that they were very close to doing what meditation also was doing on an experience. Meditation works with experience, Foucault and Derrida mostly with language and, you know, conventional paradigms. But that's that deconstructive move you already start with something that's complex. You make it conscious like creating an observational gap and instead of complexifying that object in your awareness more you tease apart the pieces which means actually to decouple all the relationships and in the end you end up with nothing because thoughts and experience are holistically codependent arising processes and when you take all the relationships out of holistically codependent arising processes, there's nothing left.

Daniel Thorson  29:38  
Yeah, and the deficiencies of this move are, as you mentioned, and we don't need to, I don't think belabor this too long. Because it might be quite obvious to listeners, but are things like nihilism, inaction and the very sophisticated term 'navel gazing,' and so you know, that that that's that's the that's the deficiency of this move. That's why doing this deconstructive move isn't what is called for (wombly?) yet at this time at this hour on the planet.

Bonnitta Roy  30:09  
Yes. But why it is actually essential to a lot of the other moves we'll talk about the more emergent ones is that it is a direct path toward creating a clean palette. And when you're trying to experiment with other kinds of meta moves or metacognition, then having a clean palette that doesn't immediately go down the old grooves, basically, toward meta-synthetic, or this infinite regress is very helpful. So yeah, so there's a whole there's a whole conversation we could have about this. 

We don't yet meta on the deconstructive move, but whether or not it is the endgame - emptiness is the endgame - or is it the fruition of a vehicle from which then a whole new line can emerge? I've always believed it's the fruition of a series of vehicles or practices, which basically now you're at. You know, now you're at the starting point, but there's a there's a whole nother podcast on that.

Daniel Thorson  31:24  
Yeah, yeah. Well, and that's one of the things that has been something I've spent a lot of time reflecting on. It's that emptiness implies malleability. Right. there's a there's a kind of liberation of fluidity. That emptiness offers us yeah, right if we if we deconstruct these other grooves, as you say, and so we'll, I guess, maybe we should spend a little bit of time you kind of went in a little bit to the metacognitive move, but I think it's worth just going down the list in order so we don't confuse people who might be watching the presentation later. Like what? How is the metacognitive move in relationship to the other two that we mentioned that what makes it unique.

Bonnitta Roy  32:03  
Okay, so in the metacognitive mood move - this is the one that highlights this creating an observational gap. And what's interesting when you look at that from an experiential if you watch yourself making metacognitive moves or you study metacognitive epistemologies there are there's something really fascinating that's happening that happens. So if I, for example, am thinking about the earth, seen from space, and I'm asking a question about it, and then in my mind, I have created an imaginary viewpoint - ie. one that is not on the earth - but of course I am on the earth. And it's such it's the same with the move from tell told me to complete kids to understand the earth is revolving around the sun required Copernicus to make an imaginary viewpoint at which he could see the earth revolving around the sun from a place that's not standing on the earth. So, what's interesting about meta-cognition or meta-cognitive moves, is that as as had been has been widely researched and reported, it creates this observational gap. But what has not been talked about, very, very much is that in creating an observational gap, you're actually also required to create a virtual viewpoint in which you're standing. Then we can go meta on that and say, what are the kinds of virtual viewpoints do people create in different types of metacognitive reasoning or epistemologies.  So this is quite complex, you can see how there's two or three levels there, of inquiry.

Daniel Thorson  34:10  
Yeah. And so you you in the presentation go into all the different modes of the metacognitive move. And there's there's a lot there, as you say, it's it's complicated. I think, for the purposes of this conversation, I want to I want to get on to the three moves that you have been have been kind of emerging now. And so I think it's useful to say at this point that these first three ways of going meta, we've been talking about the meta-synthetic deconstructive, and the metacognitive are fairly common in our culture, right, like the meta-synthetic is the most common but the other two are not that uncommon. Whereas these last three, three through six are, or four four through six are pretty experimental. And I would say it's really a response to some of the limitations of the whole Western science project and our response to some of the critiques of post modernism. And so it's very much like an emergent kind of experimental space that you and a lot of the guests on this show have been exploring. And so I'm really excited to explore these three ways of going meta, and I'll just say, I'll say the three of them, and then we'll kind of go into each of them in turn. So first, we have the 'orthogonal move' that's the fourth way of going meta in your list. Then we have 'simplexity,' which is the fifth way of going meta. And then the last is something you call 'holistically oriented critical reflexivity.' And that's the last way that you've identified and what's interesting is that each of these ways of going meta. I've actually interviewed people who are Kind of representations of, of that this kind of move. And so, you know, I'll make sure in reference to previous episodes for folks who want to explore any individual way in greater depth, but let's let's go through each of them what what is the orthogonal?

Bonnitta Roy  36:16  
Okay the 'orthogonal move' is a kind of a move that says let's just put the old mind aside and either move to entirely new - what we would call metaphysical architectures or architectures of thinking - or move to things like that are very practical practical judgment, (esquises?), phronesis. These are all Greek terms, because it was a similar moment in Greek philosophy, which tried to say all this kind of conceptual thinking is not really practical. So we have actually a lot of these these Greek terms, but what it means is, for example, in terms of switching to different architect cognitive architectures, Whitehead wrote a huge amount of work a big cannon on speculative, speculative ontology. So that speculative metaphysics he was saying, What if? What if our minds in the world what if we used our mind to look at the world in this different way? And instead of basing it on objects and things basing it on movement and process, what if we make movement and process primary?  Of course, everything reverses right subjects become objects, and past becomes future and effects become causes, because he reversed some fundamental feature of our paradigm. And so that's one that I'm really familiar with. Can't .. not sure it'll be interesting to think of when in the history of philosophy that has been done before Deleuze probably with, you know, rhizomatic interfaces and guitare. So, I think, Roy Bhaskar's move to critical realism. And then the people that follow them that said, object oriented philosophy, let's take objects as real and fundamental, you know, what would happen then? So these are kind of experimental choices. people choose to construct their thinking and their paradigms, this way to see what what they can discover and what kind of questions they can ask that they haven't been able to ask. And that's still very much an epistemology.

Daniel Thorson  38:51  
Yeah, yeah. And one of the things you say is that it's sort of like making a meta move on some of the primary metaphysical assumptions. In most cases of modernity, yeah, so there's something really interesting in that.

Bonnitta Roy  39:05  
But But what it enables you to do is once you've said, well, let's just turn to a different architecture of thought that you're just inhabit that thought you don't make meta moves on it because it opens enough novelty, that you can stay at level one within the new paradigm. Right. So that's, that's the advantage of it. One of the advantages of it. So you read the same questions within this completely different logical construction.

Daniel Thorson  39:35  
Yeah. And so one of the things you say about all that kind of movement between one and six of the various ways of going that is that there's progressively less complexity in each of the various moves, typically speaking. And so as you say that in the orthogonal move, there's a kind of flattening out of things. So there's less ontological depth What I experienced the orthoganal move especially like talking with people like Adam Roberts. Also, I think Rob Burbea is kind of exploring this in his own way within, in relationship to Buddhism, that there's a kind of like liberation of creative energy and experimentation, because you're no longer burdened by the complexity of the meta-synthetic move, you're kind of like, freed from that. And so there's this kind of like, almost like, aesthetic space, creative space. It's opened up that Yeah, there's that opens up as a kind of flat terrain of exploration. It's really interesting.

Bonnitta Roy  40:35  
It's a whole new sandbox. My my, my my favorite one, and this is something that I love to live in. And that is Neo animism like Graham Harvey's Neo-animism, that that there's agents on both sides of the Pacific participation. So coffee moves a million people every morning and great wars. actually been fought over tea. And this notion of seeing the animated part of the interaction on what we would also call non living or other living animals, you know that the whole world can become animated that when green, this green of spring, draws my eye, it's not just the desire in me, but there's something about the green itself that has the power to turn my attention. This way of these omni-directionality of agents and agency is a choice and when you make that choice, the a lot gets solved in a lot of novel experiences the world can become enriched.

And... but though and those are in the in the realm of epistemologies, but you mentioned Adam, Robert, and it's cool because I created this term orthogonal and then I realized Adam Robert was doing it. And of course, the title of his website and his work is The Side View which means to make this orthogonal means moving sideways, you know. And this is more on the second move, which is, let's not let's just keep our epistemology adequate to the practical task at hand. They base the validity of an epistemology that base qualify that as what works. Stay close to the bone, use the body use perception, attention and attention. He talks about perception the body as an instrument of perception. So kind of moving it down into this rich lived kind of practice and the second, this so the second definition of the orthogonal move gets us really close to what we're going to talk about. The last one, which is basically not an epistemology at all.

Daniel Thorson  43:03  
Yeah, yeah. And I think what's what's really cool, I think within the orthogonal kind of space is that there's a, I think you called it I, I kind of hate and love this term, but meta metaphysics, right? Where there's this liver this capacity then to sort of like, Oh, yeah, I can see the world in this animistic way where everything has agency and is participating in me as I'm participating in it. And I can just kind of like, try that metaphysics on not necessarily because it's had some sophisticated medicine thetic argument to support it, but just because maybe it practically delivers more meaningfulness or calls forth my participation in the world in a way that I appreciate, right? There's this kind of freedom to play with different ways of seeing different metaphysics even in order to achieve particular pragmatic ends, perhaps.

Bonnitta Roy  43:52  
Yeah, and I want to make the point that these moves, require creative creative imagination. Just to like, well then what am I going to move to? But they're not illogics. Like if you look at Neo animism, if I say coffee animates people, you'll see if you do a certain practice that the it's not illogical, it's not fiction. It's not fantastical, you can see that the only reason why we don't say that is due to a construction of mind, yes, hey, we want to make sure that we're not creating just illogics. But what we're doing is we're saying Let's release the boundary of mind that always has it this way. And in this case, I don't create a different boundary. I don't say that when subjects like who is either Dan Dennett, or I think Daniel Dennett talks about zombie people. So then he creates a different type of boundary, you know that people actually don't have minds. But here I'm just releasing the boundary of what it is to be a subjective agent in participation. So Yeah, so we're not talking about like, something that is, you know, not rational or not logical. They have their own log demand for logics within their own paradigms. Yeah. Mental paradigms.

Daniel Thorson  45:17  
Yeah. Cool. So if you want to explore this meta move, I highly recommend Adam Roberts work and I did an interview with him previously, you can search for that with Adam Roberts. And as Bonnitta mentioned, The Side View is his publication website podcast. And he's doing really interesting work to explore, I think this kind of orthogonal space. Definitely. And so yeah, let's let's move on to the next move, which you call 'simplexity.' And, yeah, so what is what simplexity.

Bonnitta Roy  45:52  
So this area is actually being populated by a lot of activity right now. A lot of people kind of evolved to some kind of radial expansion. So simplexity are modes that dis, this is kinds of gets complicated. So there's this mode that seeks to identify something like source protocols or deep code inside the epistemic architecture. So for example, I've done podcasts with you where instead of talking about power at this kind of like postmodern way where there's patriarchy and there's like institutional racism and all this complexity, we say, well, let's go back what is power? Like? How do we understand power from the lived experiences attempt to say, I've got lost in the discourse? Can we figure out what is the most fundamental like I call conceptual prime about power and then reboot what we're talking about. Because sometimes the discourse is really pointing just to history of the discourse itself and not not re-examining its own roots, and perhaps even our understanding of power is different. So this attempt to move down to a lower level of abstraction that's real in all cases, and then going slowly, not jumping into this hyper complex discourse. Say, what, what is the problem we're trying to solve with this discourse? Can we stay closer to the simply definitions to examine what our problem is and move toward resolution and I did a whole series of articles in Medium. It's, it's put together as a big article in integral leadership review on releasing complexity which just goes through the different levels of systemic complexity that we can start to parse down to get to a level of what I call heuristics, which is just drawings that help us make sense of things. So, Hmm, I could do that. But then a lot of people are doing it in different ways.

Daniel Thorson  48:16  
Yeah. And so I think what I found really fascinating was that three of the people that you identify as being sort of experimenting within this emerging meta mode are Jordan Greenhall, Daniel Schmactenberger, and yourself. Three of the people that in this podcast I've been most drawn to is having something kind of they're holding something radically new and useful and relevant to the situation we find ourselves in. And so I wonder if you could kind of differentiate between what you see like Daniel doing and what you see Jordan doing and what you're doing.

Bonnitta Roy  48:54  
Yeah, so um, I recently read a book called onto-politics by David Chandler, and he has a very good framework, I would I would like to share it because I think it gets clarity around this. And he calls the three different ways of simplexity is mapping, sensing and hacking. So mapping he clarifies all and also he said these are all modes of thinking that are driven by the the emergence of the Anthropocene the effects of the Anthropocene. So mapping is looking for causal depth, depth. And this maps clip more closely to what Daniel Schmactenburger is doing. He's really interested in general generator functions, highly leveraged tipping points and thresholds entrophic cascades. When you hear him speak and he's outlining how one thing impacts the other and impacts the other people. Really looking for ontological causes of conflicts and trying to map those out. And so in this sense Chandler characterizes as a focus on auto poetic systems. This affects that which set which set affects that kind of thing. But the challenge here is that you can run in a situation run into a situation where there's the depth is there's infinite amount of depth in the causal chain. So it is a move towards complexity. But it has this topology of being very, very, very deep. Now.

So in the middle channel talks about sensing, mapping, sensing and hacking and hacking. Sensing in this case, is, unfortunately, not the same as what other people think of when they talk about sensemaking in this case, Chandler talks mostly about datafication. And in this area, and it's and I think I'm bringing it in here because it didn't make my tutorial, I don't think. And it's a whole range of ways that we as humans are moving toward that people like you and I do not highlight. So I think we should put it here. And that is what he means by sensing is that there are with the power of AI to look at patterns across vast amount of data. And all the surveillance equipment we have in all this data mining we're doing from social media. AI can find patterns that are based on correlation only not cause. So for example, you might find that when women in London switch to a certain color in fashion There's an uprising in Kabul. Now AI might actually see this, but nobody thinks that there's a causal linkage between fashion color in London and up in, you know, and violence in Kabul. But what may be the case is that some, you know, a cell in Kabul sends their messages through a shipping company that picks up this color from some, you know, eclectic color manufacturer and then that goes to London. So, there are these contingent causal links. But it makes makes the final end point and the effect just correlational And apparently, AI starting to notice these things, they tend to be temporary. And the whole reason for this type of surveillance is not really unlike Schmactenberger's work or mine and Jordan Hall's, it's not really to create new things, it's to mitigate, like mitigate negative things. So they really look into homeostasis to the past, you know, to keep the power structures as they are to keep such status as usual situation as usual. But there's a huge amount of investment in this second level and the reason why it's called it makes my category 'simplexity' is because you're not looking for causal chain. You're not asking complex questions. You're just really looking for patterns across many many, many, many data points. So it's, it's, it's, whereas Chambliss says in the first case, you're looking for veracity or truth. In the second case, you're looking for quantity and velocity. Hmm. So I just wanted to put it here because it is a new kind of approach driven by the Anthropocene. See, certainly, you know, we tend to be less interested.

Daniel Thorson  54:03  
Yeah, yeah. And it is an attempt to offer up simple ways of navigating complexity. That's kind of like what it sold as right is it helps you make sense of all of the data out there, and gives you a simple tools for interacting with it. And so it's, yeah, it's so interesting that it's going after the same. There's a similar directionality, as you mentioned, it's very fascinating. 

Yeah, it's a Yeah, it's saying we can't understand it. So we're not gonna try to understand it. We're just gonna look at patterns and act. And we don't even know if our actions are in the right direction. It's just simple feedback loops between AI and, and boots on the ground. Basically.

There's a lot that can be said about that.

Bonnitta Roy  54:48  
It creates correlations between AI and deep mind and boots on the ground. Yeah. So but I would, it wouldn't, it would You know, Chandler helped me realize it's in this category. Also, he calls it sensing. But as I said, it's not sensing the way we usually think about it. Now, the third one's called hacking, I find myself in the hacking category, which I really like. And that is in hacking. There's a great reversal about the Anthropocene and in hacking you say, okay, all these surprises, these things we didn't predict or failed to predict or failed to take seriously, because some of these effects we've actually been predicting for a long time. There's something in the there's something in the system in which we can just allow the surprises to move us toward, you know, injecting novelty in the system. One of the things we're injecting novelty in is all these different ways of thinking. So instead of instead of autopoetic, which is systems interplaying with eachother, or homeostatic, it's truly advancing novelty. No reminds me of what Nora Bateson once told me, she said things have to get a whole lot weirder before they can get better. And it's kind of like not moving in the direction in the sense, like, let's drop an atomic bomb. But moving into if we have a lot of migration instead of, instead of passing legislation to slow down migration, what can we do, for example, to amplify migration? And how could that help us like moving in the direction of the response? and so. It's, it's harder to understand but it's this notion of let's just creative creatively liberate ourselves from being contracted by the response of Gaia. Okay, and we say, not that Gaia's punishing us not that guy is dying, but Gaia wants us to dance in this new participation and it really mind me of, for example, when I talk about, you know..

If you're gardening and you see insects, eating your plants, instead of you say, oh, here's more life, this is a surprise. You know, I didn't want this to happen, let's say, here's a surprise, there's more life in my garden. Now, how can I even add more life? to balance that. you know, it's like, not get rid of the more life that came in that seems to be a problem, but the Oh, more life. It's telling me add more life. Now. It's, you know, you can't be reductive about it and say, No, the climate is telling us to add more heat. But these creative ways you have to be really creative of how you respond to the invitation. This is an invitation. This is an invitation because it is a holistic system that wants to heal itself. And it's kind of like the way we create homeopathic medicines, right? They're not allopathic. They're not if then if you take this pill, then you can get better. It's kind of trying to work within the feed loops of the system itself. And I would put in this Charles Eisenstein's way of looking at the complexity of you know, that the, that the, what the earth is doing is not a problem is that we, in our response, we are destroying the systems that the earth needs to move to to handle 9 billion people that say maybe the earth can handle 50 billion people we don't know.

But it's, it's kind of hacking, you know, hacking through these normal ways, being very creative, and try to see some of this as liberating structures like, you know, that Earth is banging us on the head, not to stop, but like to creatively advance into a certain trajectory that that we're not quite smart enough to see even though it's, you know, hidden in plain sight. So I think that that makes part of it. In my tutorial I put Dave Snowden in sense-making approaches. And he is in, you know, the sense in the second category in terms of sensing more using technology to sense more, but he certainly not into like the extreme version of datafication that Chandler talks about so all of these are in, in the notion of simplexity, because what they're trying to simplify is release the complexity of trying to find causal depth in some way or another have simple feedback loops between let's say, in Dave Snowdens were surveys that people have turned into visualizations and then Single feedback loop, I interpret the visualization and just move on from there. So fun to get back to more simple discourse, simple, but powerful protocols, simple perceptual feedback loops in moving forward. Hmm.

Daniel Thorson  1:00:16  
Yeah. And so I what really struck me in the presentation when you were describing this was when you framed the Anthropocene as the the surprising and novel participation of the world itself, then that the hacking perspective could kind of see this and work with this. I was surprised though, you said that one of the challenges, the challenges that I was identified for hacking was meaninglessness. Yeah. I wonder if you could speak a little bit about that.

Bonnitta Roy  1:00:46  
Yeah, we talked about this in the last cohort I had. Um, so the provocative point. That Chandler raises is he he sees a progression he's trying to see well what's the progression between these three? And he says that, well, you know, over time, we need to learn to be less than less instrumental of the Earth. And so he talks about how we, you know, use the earth as an object, we've instrumentalized it for extraction, everything is for us, for us for us. But then he says that, by the time you get the hacking, you see really how deep it is that we actually don't understand the Anthropocene because we want to make what's what the earth is how the earth is behaving, still make meaning for us, right? We want to be saved, we want to survival. We want to please fix climate change. And why because we want to live or we want to save the parts of life that we love. It's all the whole thing is in our own meaning making system. And so he's suggesting that that's still very powerful, although subtly instrumentalizing the Earth, it reminds me of something I say to my students early on in the course. And it's worth talking about, you know, as we do levels or develop adult development levels of spiritual growth, you know, there's levels everywhere. 

And I say that I only have, I have a three rubric system. The first system is that we think everything you know, to solve to increase happiness, and increase pleasure and decrease suffering. It's all about external conditions, right? So all about that person over there. That system up there. If I had to More money if the sun if it didn't rain, you know, everything is trying to fix the external landscape. 

And then the second so that's one level, the second level where many people a lot of people spend part of the time there and, you know, when we complain, I could do this if I had more money or if blah, blah, blah, but the middle term is occupies spiritual practitioners for a long, long time and I call it cracking the code, you realize just how much the external situation at least your perception of it depends upon your internal state. So we, we spend a lot of time there. 

But the third the third move, in my opinion is a tremendous leap in consciousness. And that is you realize it's never been about you. And so there's there's been you see how egotistical even the middle stage is because even though You're doing all this work and you call it spiritual and you might, you know, be rewarded with having achieved the highest yana or something. It's really about you. And in the third phase using way out, and you realize it's never been about you and you start you people start talking about being an instrument, an instrument to this larger happening. And so you basically are curious, how can I creatively be part of this, you're not really making meaning because the making meaning comes through you. And you start to realize how inadequate to the task, a human perspective is on what is going on, you know, and so, that can be liberating feeling, but actually, when I tried it on in my course a couple of weeks ago, it was you know, it can be very close to despair and meaninglessness. But we quickly noticed that we can't help stop stop making meaning that we shouldn't expect the world's behavior to provide meaning for us, we need to say, you know, we are creatively meaning making ourselves in this project is a tiny little piece of what the cosmos does. And, you know, so it's kind of like, just seeing the scale at which things actually are and coming to terms with that. Make sense? 

Daniel Thorson  1:05:45  
Yeah. Interesting. Yeah, there's, it does make sense and I think, yeah, especially what you said around, you can't help but make meaning and that there's somehow more asked of us instead of Putting it all on the world, in this case are more asked of the whole. I don't know. Yeah, I can't I can't even speak to this to this way of saying it's very hard with the language we have.

Bonnitta Roy  1:06:14  
And yeah, I think it has, you know, it has something to do with (..?) called drop the theistic attitude. You're not a god, you're not close to the gods, and there are no gods to save you. And yet, ah the light, you know, and yet, so it's, it's something like that. But anyways, that's a piece of it. That's a that's a kind of a deep piece. I just kind of got in to thinking about that or meditating on that recently. So..

Daniel Thorson  1:06:50  
Is there anything else that you want to say about this simplexity move before we head into the final, the final meta move?

Bonnitta Roy  1:06:59  
Yeah, so The only other thing that I want to say about the simplexity move is that the one of the features of this is that in all these cases, there's a question of separating epistemic complexity from ontological complexity.  And that is understanding that the notion of complexity itself is an epistemic structure. Right? And sometimes I use the, again, I overuse this in a sense, but I use the story of Ptolemy and Copernicus. Ptolemy had outlined the movements of the planets around the the earth in terms of cycles and epicycles had great explanatory power, explained why the parent retrograde of Mars For example, but it was it was a very complex system. And then once you revise the model of the movements based upon thinking of the sun as the center of the solar system, then it released the complexity of the mental model. And but the planets didn't all of a sudden, like run around and rearrange themselves, right? So there's always this question of is the complexity in the world or is it in the construction that the mind is using to frame or interpret or to make mental models or to think about the world and you can go a long way by really assuming that the complexity and even the notion of complexity is in a mind that so frames the world. 

Daniel Thorson  1:09:01  
Yeah, which which brings us nicely into the, into the last move, which maybe is the hardest one to describe of all of these. And I know when my friend, Peter Park, he also watched you do the presentation at your house. And he felt the most resonant with this, which I think speaks to his monastic training. And so there's a kind of some there's something in this last move, which you call holistically oriented critical reflexivity, which makes sense to those with a lot of meditative or embodied training. But can you can you kind of sketch a picture as best you can of this of this move?

Bonnitta Roy  1:09:42  
Yeah. So it's there's a nice bridge to what we just said. And that is, once you realize that, the difference between epistemic complexity and ontological reality, let's say because I don't want to say ontological complexity. But just just, you know, what you see is what you get. That name enables you to think of well not think to drop much or most of your framework and just concentrate on what I would call the evolutionary potentials of the core self, which are things like attention, perception, sensation. And if you refine those, so, you see more you feel more, you imagine greatly with conscious intention, then you enter a whole new way of being in the world. So these are non epistemic even the conscious application of creative imagination is not I would call non epidemic because you're not, not supposing that that is knowing The world, you know, you're aware that you're adding imagination to the world. So it's a difference between. It's a metaphor of children looking at clouds and imagining horses in them. They know and if you remember when you do this as a child, you, you think of a horse and then you, the horse is coming, you can feel there's something in your body that's also shaping these cloud formations into that perception, right? You feel that it's a holistic participation. You're not fooled. You don't like then all of a sudden think there's horses in the cloud. So that's what actually we do as scientists, we add epistemic frameworks and then we're full. We think there's like atoms in the world. You know, we we forget that we are actively shaping to create an imaginary worlds within worlds. So I want to add that but but the The aspect of this, which is learning is that we actually learn to see not we learn to use our perceptual faculty much more precisely, clearly. And skillfully, we feel more we see more greater powers of attention, just those three things. And then knowing, noticing and consciously choosing imaginative overlays enables a different way of being produces what I think would qualify, I'm using a new phrase as 'trans-rational worlds' that we can bring into being.  So this, I think, is an interesting experiment that,that that's happening in different places and at different levels of commitment. 

Daniel Thorson  1:12:57  
But one of the things that you said in the present And that really helped this click for me is you said something like, because you are a part of the world system. And you are also self similar to it. You are therefore a microcosm of the world system, and you perfectly reflected and it perfectly reflects you. So you can work to solve problems at the simplest level. And if you do so, with a holistic orientation, you solve everything at once, which is something that you mentioned that I remember that Nora Bateson says a lot and I had her on the show, and she said, this kind of thing, which which when she said I was like, that's very provocative, but I have no idea how that could possibly be true. Oh, is there anything that you can kind of say about that? That whole what I just said that might offer some more understanding or substance to that, that phrase framing because it's so it's very provocative?

Bonnitta Roy  1:13:53  
No, I mean, what you just said is beautiful and captures exactly what this seems to be pointing to and yeah, I wish that there were more communities really being able to see the power of this kind of way of being. And I guess I do have one phrase that I use to capture, capture this. And that is so I really truly believe how did I get to this and I've had this very strong and clear notion of what is required for us to transition what is required of us at this particular moment. And what is required of us is something similar to how we evolved language in that in that phrase, how we evolve language how language evolved through To be in our use of language or how language evolved to be speech, human speech. 

And that is when, for example, more children and we learn, we're learning to speak, we don't first study a manual, and then figure out how to do it before we can get started, right? And even now, even though people study it and have theories, we don't really understand how children learn to speak. It see. So I think that in this in this section, holistic participation, we're not gonna know how to do it beforehand. So we can't describe it. And even if we get to that, and this is who we are as humans, we will not be able to look back and know how we do it. But we can learn how to be this way. In that is what I've always been saying. We're looking for We're looking at change evolutionary processes of the human that we actually don't know how to do, and won't know how we've done them, but that we can learn to do. And we learn to do it through holistic participation.

Daniel Thorson  1:16:19  
So I find myself extremely curious about this move. And yet not really knowing how to open up those kind of evolutionary spaces in which that learning might take place or that kind of groping towards this might take place. If you have any sense of what those spaces might be like, like how do we cultivate or create those kinds of spaces to participate in?

Bonnitta Roy  1:16:44  
I think that it's this concentration on perception, sensing. Understanding the power of creative imagination and doing and using that consciously and not becoming embedded in any such products, and also another thought.., but I can't think and so sensing, tension, perception, understand that use creative imaginaries. And, you know, so all of these things do not hurt. All of these things are performed with your body, you know. So it has a big, it has an embodied component component to it. And I think that and then being able to trust that work, even though it's one of these things that's not going to build what we typically understand as knowledge in the world. We cannot know what we're doing. And that and learn to not rely on satisfying that aspect of the mind that's greedy in that way that wants to be resolved that wants to be satisfied that wants ideas to be resolved that wants things to be resolved this once and for all. And to come full circle. That's kind of what drives the meta systemic complexity that we saw the problem but it's not solved once and for all. So instead of just dealing with it again, we try to solve it at a higher level of complexity so it can be solved once and for all, and this once and for all, obviously, is an illusion, because impermanence is a fundamental truth about the universe. So I guess that's something else we can put into this into this this place.

Daniel Thorson  1:18:46  
Yeah, yeah, yeah, but not attempting to go into the solving it once and for all resonates a lot. And I, what's coming to mind is my conversation with Leah Bock it seems like now looking back that she's exploring this territory with the work that she's doing..

Bonnitta Roy  1:19:03  
And you know, and that gets us back into continuous participation and creative advance, I would say creative liberated advance.

Daniel Thorson  1:19:17  
Well. And so with these six different modes, we just kind of did a tour, a quick tour of all of them. Where do you see this going? I mean, this adds a lot of meat to the bones of your sense and what you've sort of described as us seeking new minds, right, that the Anthropocene is, to some degree inviting us to create discover new minds with which to participate in the world. And I'm curious like, so we've, we've seen the three that we kind of know pretty well and that seemed inadequate to the challenges that we're facing. And then we see these three new modes of emerging. Where is this process going? Do you see them like combining into one mode? Do you see them? Like kind of all doing their own thing? Do you see many more being discovered? What's your kind of sense of that right now?

Bonnitta Roy  1:20:10  
Well, if I can morph that question a little, I would say, Well, what what's the Is there a practical contribution and outlining something like this? I hope so. So a practical contribution. And this is where this presentation over intersects with my other presentations and that is a lot of people are asking, what type of skills do we need to teach children to teach new generations when we are facing not only an unknown future but an unknowable future? Right. So we're at the point we realized that some of these simpler ways of looking at causal relations are not useful. So Some of the things we can teach are metacognitive skills. And all of these would go into that not not just teach, like, we teach meta-synthetic thinking but not because we have people consciously do meta-synthetic teaching, we just, it's just kind of we inhabit that world in academia. 

I read something interested in this great book by Dan Brown. A lot of people know him because of his book on meditation. But he wrote a great book about attachment disorders and adult psycho pathologies. And he has worked a lot with children and he's starting to identify spaces or openings or opportunities, where we could we can see that metacognitive states i would say they are state of mind. They appear very early in childhood. But we don't acknowledge them. We don't we don't see them for what they are. We certainly don't scaffold them. And and I think that it doesn't have to be serious. I think children, they, a lot of their plays really metacognitive. And we just think it's child's play. But I call these in my other presentation, the evolutionary potentials of the core self. They have greater evolutionary potential to create leaps through adult life. 

And I think that we need to pay more attention here, instead of paying attention to the classic ways that like, go in cognitive development goes through stages. So I'm working with someone who's using Dan Brown's work and also the great work by Allan Schore. Affective assets and attachment and the origins of the self and work with pioneers like Jack Panksepp on the effective streams. And a lot of this literature is in the context of psycho therapeutic intervention or psycho pathology, and we're trying to mine them for not psycho pathology and healing, but for scaffolding, evolutionary potential, absent any extreme trauma, but just, you know, while you navigate the existential condition of being a human, so, this is where I think there's a lot of possibility. I think this kind of orientation is good in a monastics setting because of some of these core practices and skills that already taking place in a mass monastic setting and gee I sure hope we could have some kind of curriculumspecialized for designing transformative education in in young people and young adults along this kind of a framework. So if it could make a contribution, I would hope that it's pretty easy to, to get from here to there. And that's something we could do.

Daniel Thorson  1:24:29  
Yeah, it's interesting. I was recently speaking with Zack Stein, who just wrote this book Education in a Time Between Worlds all about how education given the future that's emerging. It makes sense to make education the kind of primary directive of our civilization because we need to prepare people somehow for a future that's, as you say, unknowable. And one of the things that I think this model that you've shared today, reveals to me is that like, that doesn't just mean Making people who can do the meta-synthetic, who are like really good philosophers, or Einsteins, or something like that there's actually a whole range of minds that we can cultivate, that can do things that we have, we just probably have no idea right now what they can do, that they may be able to participate in the world in really substantially different and beautiful ways that could, yeah, we just don't we don't, we don't really know where this is going. But we're kind of knocking on the doors of particular directions that are opening up to us now. And perhaps it's the next generation who can really take these much further.

Bonnitta Roy  1:25:34  
Yeah. And so we could make kind of a strong cut, well it's not that strong, but there's a lot of people working on improving the mind we have, and there's a lot of good work in that domain. But then there's this whole possibility of not settling for the mind we have. And it is an evolving mind, not just the developing mind. You don't need to just develop the mind we have, it's probably inadequate to the task, I'm pretty sure it is inadequate to the task. And it may be also why it's so hard to get more than 2- 3% ideally, I guess, into that kind of development because the mind is already moving orthogonally and that's the direction that evolution takes, it doesn't just put, you know, a different, a different packaging on top of a developmental stage progression it creates to create something new. And I've been at, at the I've been in the practice of looking for this new mind for a little over a decade now. And it's just getting more and more exciting. So I think this is real. And I think that it's really exciting to be able to, you know, I mean to have a podcast on something like this. It's really sophisticated requires a lot of imagination to stay with. But I think there's a ever increasing and growing audience around these kinds of topics. And yeah, that's really exciting.

Daniel Thorson  1:27:17  
Yeah, and so I would, I will link to the presentation itself in the show notes, and I highly recommend going through it, it. As Bonnitta said, it's quite complex, like it definitely pushed me to the edge of my capacities and my ability to do various meta moves. But it was well worth it. I feel like it helped me understand in a deeper way, a lot of what I've been drawn to in the inquiry of this podcast, and so it clarified it also helped me take more ownership of my own capacities and some of these different meta moves. And yeah, it was well worth well worth the journey well worth the kind of struggle of really trying to learn it well enough to be able to speak in this type of So, really appreciate you coming on the show bunny. curious if there's anything before we close the conversation that you'd like to say that perhaps you didn't get a chance to say?

Bonnitta Roy  1:28:09  
No, I just want to also reflect that, that when you and Peter were here at my farm, all the lore, you know you had purchase on this because it is kind of the groove that you have already begun to enact in certain circles in the Monastic Academy. And I think this is that gives us reason to believe that there's a lot there can be a lot of benefit and reward and in pursuing some of these frameworks, and it's just so exciting to collaborate with people and well, what a gift that you are Daniel, and the people that you continue to highlight.
