Daniel Thorson  0:07  
Welcome to another episode of Emerge. In this episode, my guest is Ronan Herrington. Ronan is the creator of alter ego, and network and organization attempting to spread a vision of a better modern politics throughout Europe. In this conversation, we talked about the nitty gritty praxis of systems change the realities of the emerging meta modern subculture and seen some of the real life joys and sorrows of trying to do this kind of work and what it means to take on leadership in the midst of complexity. Please enjoy this episode of emerge with Ronan Harrington

Welcome to another episode of Emerge. This week, or this episode, my guest is Ronan Harrington. Ronan. Welcome to the show. 

Ronan Herrington  1:26  
Thank you. 

Daniel Thorson  1:28  
So, we've had a couple conversations about or touch ins about what we might talk about today. And, you know, I we on this show, we've been sort of diving into this idea of a meta modern politics. And really the whole topic of the show that weaves through every episode is sort of what is the next paradigm that human beings are going to discover and create that will resolve the sort of seemingly intractable problems of our current instance of the human experiment. 

And so, we've had these conversations that are quite theoretical and strategic about meta modernism in this kind of emerging political movement.  And, Ronan, you occupy, I think a very special and interesting place in the kind of ecological niche of this emerging culture, which is you're doing very tactical work. You're doing the kind of on the ground, rabble rousing and organizing and network building that it takes to make real and lasting transformation. And I found out about you through your work with the organization Alter Ego. And so maybe it just by way of introduction, you know, to who you are and what you're up to in the world you could talk a little bit about, about alter ego, what what, what did Alter Ego begin as and what has it become or is it becoming now? 

Ronan Herrington  3:20  
Yeah, so alterego began as a gathering of 80 leaders in progressive states to everyone from MPs, heads of think tanks to grassroots activists, artists, and I suppose put the call out by saying that progressive politics is in crisis. There is an electoral crisis in that like very few progressive political parties are winning but there's also a crisis of ideas. And the premise of Alter Ego is that a progressive politics of significance as something fundamental, we need to go to the source of what is fundamental to us, which is our spirituality. 

And it was conceived of as a three day weekend long inquiry into whether spirituality could revitalize progressive politics. And not just an intellectual inquiry, but also add space for us to experience what we often relegated to the private realm, or that we go and do on retreats and then kind of come back into a professional context and don't talk about so alongside panels and workshops and discussions. We had a death meditation for all 80 participants meditated on the last 12 hours of their life, to the sound of shamanic drumming, and it's in that kind of deeper space, that you actually access the kind of deeper and broader realm of intelligence that is missing from daily life and is definitely missing from political conversation. 

That was two and a half years ago, it was before Trump it was before Brexit. And it really came from I suppose this like many of us this sense of disenchantment from progressive politics. You know, I grew up watching the West Wing and really had that, you know, that, that, that calling and hope for a visionary politics and found that the politics that was on offer was, you know, a kind of a watered down version of neoliberalism and sending it off to the left. And, and, and also in tandem with that was going on like many of our generation a very intense and, you know, life-defining spiritual journey and, and, you know, everything from journeying into Zen Buddhism to psychedelics and, you know, going to Burning Man festivals and really getting in contact with a deeper self. 

And what I found was that, that was where my own moral imagination, my own political vision came from. It was from experience. And that was nowhere to be found in the public space in the cultural conversation in the political conversation. And so I was sitting with that, that feeling of how do we bridge these worlds? And I was kind of moving between them, you know, I was, you know, I did a master's in post-capitalist economics at Schumacher college, which is a bit of a Hogwarts environment. You know, you live as an intentional community, you go on quite a journey. And then the next year, I did a 180 and went to the Oxford School of Government where there was very little to no space given to, you know, the more authentic or vulnerable part of us.  

And so, I had many of these jarring experiences of trying to be in the established world of power and what you might call the emerging transformative alternative. And I very much yeah have been trying to bridge those worlds and reconcile those worlds. It was only until a very famous public moment when Russell Brand was on Jeremy Paxman and said, People shouldn't even bother voting. There's nothing on offer. And actually, what we need is a spiritual revolution. And it got 10 million views and it one of those... it was a real seminal moment. I remember me and Stephen Reed, who you has been on your podcast, we're good friends in London, and we had been going to Burning Man festivals and had been organizing our own kind of transformational gatherings. And we were like, let's let's do one of those but for people who work in politics, progressive change 

The final thing to say this in terms of the Genesis, it I only really had the confidence to do it, when I read a report by a guy called Jonathan Raphson, who's a chess grandmaster and a public intellectual in the UK, he wrote a report for the RSA, which is quite a leading think tank in the UK called Spiritualize: Revitalizing Spirituality to address 21st century challenges. https://www.thersa.org/discover/publications-and-articles/reports/spiritualise-revitalising-spirituality-to-address-21st-century-challenges

And in that, which I would highly recommend, everyone to read is the most incredibly cogent intellectual case for why he wants to change our systems. We have to go deep into the cultural and personal territory and ultimately spiritual and so that almost gave me the confidence that I needed to be able to you know, I suppose really put myself out there because even two and a half years ago was pretty strange thing to do, you know, ... come, come to this weekend, we're going to explore spirituality and politics, you know and be is putting a lot of, I suppose, reputation on the line and, you know, and it was the inquiry was so vague and unclear and yes, there was enough of a shared sense that there was something there that people came.  

Daniel Thorson  10:09  
Cool. And, yes, I read one of the articles you sent me and loved the line. You know, we have to therefore promote a spiritual turn amongst those who are in the system and to systemic turn for those who are spiritual. I think, from my perception looking from the outside that seems to be the two demographics we might say that you are in dialogue with, through Alter Ego, right? The people who are quote unquote, in the system or interact with the system, sort of making an argument for why spiritual experience is relevant to their work. And I imagine speaking to people who are more monomaniacal about spirituality. And attempting them to, or attempting to convince them to sort of broaden their spirituality to include the realm of politics. And I'm just, I guess the first question I want to ask you, and it's just because of my own curiosity is when you share your message with these two groups, what are what what happens? Like what is the kind of responses that you tend to get? You know, what's surprising? What if you started to learn? And I mean, you know, the big question, start where you like, and I'll probably keep asking you further, further questions. 

Ronan Herrington  11:38  
I would say that the one thing that is central to a project like this is framing, and we have an expression in Alter Ego that we're providing a solid invitation into a liquid experience. And the liquid experience you might describe as like, that moment, when the experience of transformative experience of ourselves in the world, you know, that could be at a dance floor at a rave, or it could be with psychedelics, or it could be through meditation. But if that was framed explicitly as that what that is what we're going to do, no one would come, because it's deeply exposing. And so very, very, it was a very, very careful exercise, in framing, both, like what the gathering was about. 

And then, depending on the audience, the actual particular angle would change. And it's pretty.... It was, it was, it's easy for people who are already spiritual. It takes you saying that thing that you value, and it's important, that needs to be more of that in the world. And ideally, that needs to be reflected in our politics in our institutions. And if they are, you know, already in the activist space, or they're socially minded, you know, it's like Yes, let's go and ..

It's harder, I think for what I would describe as kind of open minded progressives, who have you know, who are who are constantly thinking and talking about what's next, are seeing this kind of emerging spiritual subculture, the mainstreaming of mindfulness, things like that. And they're not really sure if there's something there, they're not really sure. Is this just a kind of a lifestyle fad? Is this just another thing that's neoliberalism has co opted? Or does it have some kind of transformative potential. And what they do is they see the Right almost being the only people in town who are using a more mystical language, they're bypass the rational narrative that the intellectual left are kind of stuck in other speaking at a much more visceral, emotional, embodied level, and they realize that on some level, the progressive politics has lost its soul lost ability to really seek to a very innate part of us. 

And so I often would, I often would draw attention to that. And imagine and ask them to imagine what that might look like, broadly on the left, that's kind of where we started, even though you might talk about this later in the podcast, how my own inquiry into a more spiritual politics has kind of led me beyond the traditional left. So just to stay there for a moment in terms of the initial invite the framing, you know, it is it was about trying to convey the potential of something. But that were that was he wasn't quite there yet, either. So he's still asking a lot of them. 

Daniel Thorson  14:43  
Mm hmm. And so, yeah, it makes sense to me that, that spiritual people would be more open to this kind of argument. And whether or not they've been, you know, I've noticed in my own experience with this sort of, line of discourse that people in the spiritual demographic will often agree with the idea of politicizing and being political and yes, this needs to filter into culture and society. But then often they don't really have a practice or or a vehicle, you know, by which to realize those aspirations. But I am, I guess, curious to dive in a little bit more around, you know, how successful have you been at convincing or persuading people coming from the other side of the equation for folks who are more in the system? You know, people as you say, I think in on the, the traditional progressive left or the mainstream progressive left, like, what's happened as you've unfolded this framing for them. Have they bought into it? 

Ronan Herrington  15:50  
Yeah. Yeah, so this is kind of lesson number. Maybe lesson number two is that the framing will only get you so far and ultimately people go to convention networks like this and come to gatherings like this because they trust you. And they feel on some level safe with you. Most of my work in Alter Ego, but particularly the beginning, was painstaking, going out into progressive circles and kind of meeting people want to win and winning them over and getting them convincing them to come. And I've done like really, really, like crazy things I have heard, I heard that there was a gathering on a boat on the Seinne in Paris in which Caroline Lucas the Green Party MP, Bazooka Jonsdottir, the founder of the Icelandic Pirate Party and Uffe Elbæk who's the founder of the Danish alternative party, all very kind of forward thinking progressive leaders they would be on that boat and I made it my business to like get on the Chunnel, train, get on that boat and have four hours within where they couldn't not be. You know, and that's how I got Caroline and (..) to come. So there is an element of you know, under was, you know other people who are quite high profile political thinkers, you know who I had to strong arm into coming and they were about to pull out some you know so it was all kind of like crazy tacics just to get them there because I trusted that once people were there they would kind of similar to you know Burning Man it's like once you're on the ground you get it on some level you can feel the potential the importance of it. In terms of how successful we have been, I think, in a way because it exists.

And it's you know, there's no there's a kind of a broad awareness of in progressive circles, not an old progressive circles it validates the basic idea validates the idea that spirituality can no longer be dismissed as a new age, new idea of no consequence.  That it has some kind of some kind of Instrumental value for politics if it doesn't already have instrumental, intrinsic value in your life. And so in a way, I think that probably more than anything we've succeeded in doing along with other organizations as well. Obviously, we're operating within like a wider ecosystem of initiatives that are doing this, so like Perspectiva and Metamoderna and others is that we have normalized this now, one of the big issues is that spirituality is taboo. And we're all on some level in the spirit closet maybe not if you live in Boulder, but many people are in the spirit closet. 

And, you know, it's interesting, you know, I I'm finding it easier and easier to speak with confidence that this is spirituality is just an you know, it's almost becoming normal. So that's been a big thing. I think One thing that I've probably learned is that it's, you know, it's one thing to get someone, particularly an MP who just has no time to come away for a weekend and have this experience, but obviously the default culture, they return to not only just the default working culture of anyone's life for the default political culture, the default party culture is so strong, both strong in terms of its materialism, and also strong in terms of, you know, exposure really isn't a go-to area.  You know, so I'm big on vulnerability, a lot there's fear of saying something potentially out of step in case you get taken down. And so it's very, very difficult to as a strategy to kind of pick off individual people if they're within a broader culture that doesn't, that isn't a good ground for the for the ideas. 

And so I think that I've slowly kind of reorient ated towards what what is the focusing both on cultural influencers who kind of have more room and license to speak. And also focusing on kind of emerging political alternatives. So kind of parties, that, for example, the initiative in Sweden, which was inspired by the alternative in Denmark, which is a party that's been hugely inspired by meta modernism and and is full of meta modern people, and they have that developmental ethic and that kind of measure modern DNA, and I think that, you know, as a as a political strategy, it probably is better to see those new, you know, what Hanzi would call trans-partisan political parties, movements in the system. Try and get a couple of seats and try Be an attractor point for parties across the left and right to be attracted towards developmental ideas or towards the vision of A Listening Society, rather than, you know, trying to convince a particular person in a think tank about these ideas, even though there is some value in that, right. So I'm always grappling with, you know, do we work outside the system? Or we do we work in the system if you work in the system, we try and kind of insert blocks of this DNA in this culture, or do we focus on particularly influential people? 

Daniel Thorson  21:30  
Yeah, interesting. And it reminds me what you're saying? The quote, I think it's Max Planck, who says a new scientific truth doesn't try and by convincing its opponents This is in the realm of science, but instead by because its opponents eventually die, and a new generation grows up that is familiar with it, I guess. I'm curious. The degree to which you've seen the your persuasion or this emerging political movement Taking place primarily within the context of the millennial generation. Like how, how strictly are you seeing this breakdown along generational lines?

Ronan Herrington  22:12  
I would say that my experience so far has been that it's been millennials and Generation X. So there is, you know, a significant amount of people who are, you know, if I just take the UK as an example, there's a whole generation that went through 90s rave culture, a huge 90s rave culture in the UK, where every weekend, there was like massive raids and people are taking ecstasy, like a lot of people who have had that ecstatic experience and have been, in many respects searching for a way to reintegrate that into their lives, and kind of haven't found us. 

So I meet equally as many, you know, 35 to late 40 year olds who are at a particular stage in their career and are looking to advance these ideas. Obviously, I think on the whole, we would be better off really focusing on the millennial generation they are, and Gen Z to some extent, in that it is this particular generation that has, you know, deep values around meaning and purpose and belonging has very little religious affiliations. So, actually, this points to another question that I'm always sitting with, which is that I frame this as a political initiative. And in, and I think that was good, because politics is the acute expression of the crisis. And there is a total crisis of ideas and it's very obvious with things like Brexit and Trump. And yet actually, if I think about the depth of change that is needed, it's almost at a religious infrastructure levels that it needs to happen. 

You know, and we often joke you know, we should we look for an individual party, or we try to start a new religion and like, it's it, there is a grain of truth in the in actually, it's the infrastructure and the architecture of society, that conditions a certain sense of self. And that needs to be redesigned in order to reshape the new Human. And so it kind of, and the end, the other thing is that politics always responds to culture. Culture is the driver. And so by founders that even though it is a political initiative, the reason we call it deep politics, because it goes far beyond the realms of what is traditionally considered political, because far beyond policy, as far beyond representative parties, and it goes into the fabric of social life, again, you know, an idea from Metamoderna and The Listening Society that actually it's about changing the fabric itself. And so that's a really a really a kind of interesting question I'm always sitting is in the trajectory of these ideas? Are we should we be trying to create political expressions of it? Or should we be trying to reinvent religious practice for this kind of digital age? Should we be trying to, you know, just create a new cultural narrative and influencing someone? And I it's an open question. I'd love to I'd love to hear your thoughts on it. 

Daniel Thorson  25:26  
Yeah, I think it's such a beautiful question. And it's actually one of the places where Steven Reid and I started dancing in in our conversation and I remember us sort of I'm not sure if he said it or I said it but that a lot of the problems that might at this point appear political will but we will discover them to be spiritual in nature. And I think that there is that that is actually an experience that we will have as a culture over time, and I think it also brings to mind the conversation I've been having with somebody named Bonnitta Roy, about how problematic it is that we tend to act on the level of emergent patterns instead of attempting to address what we might call like the generator function of the emergent patterns, right? So we try to talk about climate change. But climate change doesn't exist, nor does patriarchy or other things that we might feel are problematic. Instead, what exists is is these emergent patterns that are result of multitude of minor interactions and activities. And so how do we start to work on that level? And it's, yeah, and so it makes sense to start thinking about things like creating new religious practices or new social technologies or something to get us beneath the level of talking about these problems, and actually having experiences that might begin to shift our actual behavior

Ronan Herrington  27:07  
Yeah, I totally agree. So, to help for framing, because in a way what I sense us doing is just trying to navigate our way around the problem or even define what the problem is. And and new language and new framings can help one that I really like, comes from Rowan Williams, the former Archbishop of Canterbury. And this is a an idea that I read in one of Jonathan Ross's pieces of writing is that there is there are the crisises or ecological crisis or economic crisis, crisis is writ large and there is the meta crisis, which is the limited and harmful ways in which we approach and make sense of and discuss those problems. And it is at that level, where we are discussing them in such a limited way that we have a basic inability to even grasp what the problem is and how we might go about solving it. Two of the primary ways that you will see this is an inner development blindness. So we talk about these problems with very little reference to how the state, the character development psychology, and the spiritual maturity in an  individual and how that impacts the problem. And also, it's a it's a dialectical blindness. We are approaching all of these problems from id... partial ideological truths, and then are going to war over them. So the very basic level, there is a meta crisis that we find very difficult to apprehend. 

And then another frame supports this. And again, this is from Jonathan Rowson. And is this idea that in politics, there is the setting and there is the plot. The setting is the stage. It's a it's a culture It's the environment, it's the infrastructure. And that gives rise to a particular plot a particular narrative that dominates the, you know, the news stories. And in and in this case to, really for us to make a shift that could be described as transformative. It is about bringing the setting into discussions about the plot, and an understanding the ways in which our shared setting shapes the plot. And it's obviously very difficult because our media culture is designed never to question the assumptions and cultural parameters of the conversation. It's just supposed to have the conversation. And it has to have it in a very short, snappy sound-bytey the way. And so this is one of the reasons why this rolling long format podcast YouTube culture has arisen is because, actually, we're at a place where we need to get at the parameters, we need to talk about the meta crisis, we need to talk about the setting. And apprehend an agenda that then changes the settings. Which will probably be true, you know, a Cambrian explosion of micro-initiatives that change the relations of everyday life.

Daniel Thorson  30:22  
Yeah, I love that. I love the kind of parallel that I see to spiritual practice, right, like going meta, ie becoming aware of the drives and patterns that are constructing your experience, but on the collective level, and so there's a kind of similar there's almost like a fractal thing that's being asked for on the level of our culture and our political systems, which I love it when there's that kind of you can see those patterns. And I guess I'm curious for you like what so if you've identified that as the sort of problem-solution or the key ways of framing the problem, right, so dialectical blindness, inner-dimensional blindness, and a failure to talk explicitly about the setting. What have you attempted? or what have you seen being attempted? That works? or what have you learned in terms of attempting to open up those spaces?

Ronan Herrington  31:35  
Well, I mean, I think that a large part of I think our work is, is just to is to share this shift in perspective. And then to trust that that will go on to inform the people who attend our gatherings the people who watch or let's say our media, to then reflect that new code that new meta-code in their in all aspects of their life.

But I think that there is there's a kind of a strong red thread in, in being the thing or modeling the alternative. So one thing that I'm very, very big on is vulnerability in public life. How can we both model ourselves? And how can we create or support people who actually have big, big public profiles to model vulnerability, and in a way in doing that, that changes the premises parameters of the debate. The debate is is, you know, currently takes place where we put on our armor, we rehearse our scripts, we do not show feelings, that's all a part of the plot. And that's derived by a particular developmental setting where we haven't really received proper instruction in how to express our feelings. And that's both in negatively reinforced by our parents, and also at a fractal level by our schools and by our culture at large.

And so if you have an individual who comes to an Alter Ego gathering, let's say an MP, and they experience a new setting, which is a space where there is psychological safety, where you are seen and accepted, what is this space to really be radically honest, you can you can take that new container, that new setting that now resides in yourself, and then you can disrupt the plot. So that's an example of on an individual level, how, how that might happen. 

And, you know, the interesting thing about vulnerability is that the truth of that truth recognizes truth and people are automatically invited into dropping their own masks. So that's a very, like tiny example. And then I think that it also works on a, so, for example, let's say at the organizational level, we have people in our network, an example would be Indra Adnan who founded the retail trenches, political platform. And they would say that, you know, the pattern is that it's a representative politics pattern where, you know, the politicians decide which way to go. And they're the strategists and the people are the tacticians. They knock on doors, they get the votes. 

And actually, the fundamental shift is a type of leadership that genuinely recognizes that people are already doing the alternative. They're already self organizing at a community level to create the kind of futures that they want in the task of politics is to facilitate that is to be the tacticians of that and allow the people to be strategist. So I think there's lots of interesting ways, both at a personal level and a level of initiative where you can emancipate yourself from the default setting and then bring a range of practices and perspectives that embody beautiful. 

Daniel Thorson  35:04  
Yeah. And it's so true. I think what you're what you're speaking of is so important to see these days in particular. And it brings to mind that this article I read recently, and I forgot the name of the article, but it was basically somebody who travelled around different small towns in America, and was just reporting on all the amazing kind of emergent initiatives that were happening. We're rapidly transforming the social and economic fabric of these small villages. So on the one hand, we have this like, obviously, critically broken and just freakishly problematic politics on the national level. While at the same time, unseen, this beautiful work is being done on the hyperlocal level. And it's so curious that those two things kind of coexist and it.. Somebody mentioned to me recently, this idea that, you know, it's easy to hear the big tree crashing in the forest. But it's very difficult to hear the thousands of trees growing, you know, the budding. And there's something really beautiful that it points to the way that we pay attention. And the way that we choose what we notice, and it implicates the media and there's a lot there. And I wonder what you've what's been discovered. I'm so curious about any refer to the Initiative and the Alternative parties, these sort of my call them emerging, emerging political parties are used to use the word, transnational political parties. What, to the degree that they've kind of taken on this perspective of attempting to recognize that people are already doing what needs to be done and sort of attempting to facilitate that emergent activity. So that happens, maybe emerges more robustly?  What have you seen, like what is going on in that space? What have you observed? What what seems to be working? It seems like a completely new form of a political party. 

Ronan Herrington  37:20  
I mean, the short answer is, is that I don't fully know, because I'm not on the ground with, you know, the likes of Indra with the alternative or the Swedish initiative.  And I would say that it's, it's this place of both, you know, when you're actually in in the thick of that, and you're working with potential and you're seeing, you know, what happens when you just facilitate self organization? It's a very positive space. And yet, the despair is never far from the door because it also really feels piecemeal. You know, the small bud in the forest does feel piecemeal, next to the giant tree even if the tree is crashing. And, and so there's, I think that maybe the pattern that I'm seeing across all the initiatives that are I'm involved in, and particularly when I'm like chatting to people who are leading them is this real sense of Providence, that there's a feeling of being aligned with where the world is going and should be going and there is kind of the feeling of being a part of an epic shift in society. You know, I imagine akin to how people who grasped the potential of the Industrial Revolution in the late 17th century, you know, that that sense that even though this is very much emerging, you know, obviously people could sense the potential, so it's definitely that and then also there is the reality of the being such little funding for this. It's very little resource huge amounts of burnout. And, you know, always the question, are we just in this very niche, avant garde progressive bubble, and seeing very contrary markers, in terms of where the rest of society like the ash or you know, who, who's being voted into power. And so it's a deeply paradoxical age, I think. And, and it almost has the quality of an epic, but we really don't know how it's going to play out. And it feels like it's all hanging in the balance. Yeah. And so, I suppose what I'm interested in is, if that is the case, and knowing that we can't really fully answer that, what do we do? You know, like we spoke about this before, but how do we lead in the midst of that complexity? Or how do we know Move forward intelligently. How do we sieze the right moments? How do we usher something forward? That's very big. And we're only a tiny part of it. But I think that, for me, that's probably the most interesting question that I'm sitting with. 

Daniel Thorson  40:13  
What do you think? What what's your go on? Tell me more about your thoughts. I'm so curious about this tension.

Ronan Herrington  40:24  
So there's this really beautiful quote from Oliver Wendell James, the Supreme Court Justice in the 30s. And it's that I, I wouldn't give a fig for the simplicity, on this side of complexity. I'll give my right arm for the simplicity on the other side of complexity. 

And I've always that is always always sat with me, you know, that, that that isn't just a trope, that there is a real truth and in Christianity is an associated idea. Called your second innocence. You know you're born into Christianity, you believe there's a loving God, you can find redemption through Jesus. And then you go on an intellectual inquiry become atheist and realize God that was a crock of shit. And then a point happens when you return to what seems like a very simplistic allegorical story and realize its truth. And you live out the second innocence. 

And I'm really feeling like I'm so constantly overwhelmed by, you know, because I've departed from the simplicity on the first side of complexity. And I just feel I'm in the soup, I'm just overwhelmed, and often exhausted, I often feel anxious. I find it really difficult. I really struggle with it. And I also am aware or get glimpses of simplicity on the other side of complexity and what that might look like. Which also is just part and parcel of, you know, the my own maturing and my own getting older. And so I think that maybe two things that I'm currently sitting with, and I'm sure people listening will have other pieces of this puzzle. 

The first is to is to genuinely believe that you're being led by something greater than you and to create spaces that allow you to get out of your own way to allow that greater intelligence to come through. And, and this is something that I really struggle with because I have a tendency to over intellectualize, I will go with kind of the more strategic option as a way of managing my anxiety. And actually one of the foremost central practices of system change right now, is I think Jordan Greenhall talks about this the very feminine quality of resting and not knowing and holding space for the answer to arise and I'm very blessed to be surrounded by like very involved and enlightened women who are very good at this practice, who are very good at sitting and waiting and waiting and waiting, and then 'bang' it comes, what to do next where to go. 

And so it's a deeply - this systems change for all the talk about strategy and periods of change and all of that. Actually, there is a simplicity on the other side of complexity, which is really tuning into what feels aligned and trusting that a greater intelligence that is able to hold this complexity, and that has some kind of benevolence and is is guiding you. It's like, very, very difficult. You know, that's, that's about that's kind of at the edge of acceptable conversation in systems change world, but I think that it's something that people know to be true But they really reflect on where the big shifts have come in the direction of their lives, the big impulses, and I think you know, it more than anything, you know, if we, if we talk about, you know, let's say, an Alter Ego gathering if an Alter Ego gathering is to truly edgy, and we haven't really done that yet, we would create a space almost exclusively for that is how could we all come together for 20 of us 40 of us 80 of us, and create the right conditions to be in a high state mindset to actually surrender together and feel into what wants to emerge and tap into some kind of collective intelligence and then be led by that moving forward. Because the alternative is, which I am guilty of playing out again and again, in a very dysfunctional way is this egoic hero narrative is very masculine tendency to try and figure out what's going on and then do something and I kind of career From one decision to the next, like a pinball in a pinball machine. And so that's the thing that I am kind of, I'm saying this as a kind of, personally as a reminder to myself to do that. 

And then so that's, that's part one. And we can pick up part one of that in a second. But just briefly, part two is this.  What I'm noticing is, in a way, letting go of some of the weight of responsibility of having to change the system and having to change the world having to save the world. And being a little bit more humble and more kinder to myself, and I was on I was going to a rave on Saturday night and around four in the morning I was chatting to a friend of mine who's worked here for the last 10 years in activism and I'd really like you know, burst his gut, and he said, You know what, I'm I'm on now. freelancing, and now just doing consultancy work and getting good money. And my basic idea is that my 20s were for saving the world. And now I'm gonna let someone else have a go. And I was like, wow, okay, interesting is that Yeah, like, I'm just one person, 7 billion people here. But the thing that really struck me was he said, all of the forces that will shape the world over the next hundred years, both for good and bad are already in play. They're already on the table. And he said, I am not going to kill myself to make the forces that I believe in come about three months earlier. And I thought that was a very, very interesting idea. 

You know, and I sense a shift from a quite an activist mentality, of pushing something over the line, which has also has its place there is a place for struggle and pushing things forward, but I wonder whether there is a virtue in actually surfing the waves and embodying a kind of a playful naivety and just tinkering and making interventions and and that could we, you know, the kind of the classic perfectionist over-anxious overachiever defines themselves in these circles in these social change circles could today and by they, I mean I can give myself permission to be in that space and actually would would that facilitate part one the greater intelligence because actually at a very basic level your nervous system is looking stressed out and actually receive, you know the kind of subtle cues to accompany intuition. So there that's kind of part one and two of what I'm seeing. 

Daniel Thorson  47:52  
I love that and I mean it's so true. Much of what you say in my in my first hand experience And I think what I noticed too is is this connection between sympathetic nervous system activation and my inability to act on behalf of the whole. Right? Like when I am not being kind to myself, when I get when I lose my seat, then I can't do the very work that needs to be done in order to make whatever change I am capable of bringing. And so to see the inescapability of that relationship, I think is for me part of how I have over time, I think spent more time in that second simplicity. You know? .that I have just been burned so many times by being a sent-a-whirling and I suspect there's no way to get there other than by being burned over and over again. Yeah.

Ronan Herrington  49:02  
And I'd say this like from a place of burnout.  I feel really burnt out yet I you know, I feel like I, you know, if I, if I don't shift something, I'm going to pop, you know. So it's definitely coming. Yeah. And I think you will, right you will figure it out because you care so much. 

Unknown Speaker  49:44  
(Silence, maybe an cut?)

Daniel Thorson  49:44  
And I also think that there's the reality of kind of seasons of our life. You know, like I remember after eight months of organizing with Occupy Wall Street that I was just completely blasted like just completely done, you know, I had burned out like three months before I left. And but I was still I was kind of like walking dead style just trying to do it. And I left and I came to Boulder for the first time and spent a long time healing. And what that looked like for me was just ignoring the politics and ignoring system change not in like an intentionally giving away. But just as like, it wasn't part of my life just wasn't part of my life. I just dropped it. And I think that that was necessary for me so that I could again engage later. And I see often I think, in these cultures that people don't give themselves that kind of opportunity to profoundly and deeply rest and digest their experiences, like maybe they'll go for like a weekend retreat. But, you know, it takes a long time for our nervous system to kind of unwind these experiences. I know for me, I mean, Occupy was traumatic in both directions, you know, and and it's just like, I still sometimes feel like I'm digesting bad experience was so big. 

Ronan Herrington  51:25  
Yeah, I agree. I mean, I am basically, you know, we kind of switched our tactics a bit this year and for energy into launching our new media channel. It was such a steep learning curve, and, you know, made all of the mistakes one makes when they try and do something new, I'm at a pace where just feeling burnt out. And so we're going to wrap up the first season in a couple of weeks, and then I'm going to take six weeks off and really yeah, to give myself that time and space just to renew and for the next impulse to arrive. Because I have this feeling that like, again, it's coming back to this idea of intelligence. And how intelligence like real intelligence, no matter what your kind of metaphysical theory of it is, it can't come through a clenched, being, you know, if we are constricted, our intelligence is also limited. And so it's this very fine balance between operating in very precarious, poorly funded quite high-stress complex environments and having to remain soft and open. And that's a particular type of jujitsu that is required to navigate that particular world. And that that is something that we've got, you know, it's a very, very little formal training in how to really navigate and ...

Daniel Thorson  52:59  
What kind of lightning bolted in my head, as you were saying that was the way in which what you and I are speaking about now is a kind of personal working through of it's the pattern that is dominating our world right now. Right? Like, we're lucky enough to be able to take a step back. But like, if there's one thing that our socio economic system does really well, I think it's actually restrict the natural intelligence of the human beings, like, how many people are unable to be truly intelligent, truly intelligent, you know, if we, if we if we are agreeing that this kind of intelligence that emerges out of the openness of our being like, like how rare if ever do people access that because they're so constantly on the move and they're, you know, or they're constantly on their phone, they don't have a chance to rest and our entire world conspires to keep us clenched in that way.

Ronan Herrington  53:58  
It's the strongest argument I've heard for basic income is that if and obviously it wasn't framed as 'it gives you space to tap into your divine and innate intelligence,' but it was that it just gives people space to make sense of where to go. That was in the context of it being more productive for the economy, because people don't actually take time to consider what jobs they are matched to, rather than just take the next available job to plug the financial gap. But I think that there is a I think that maybe what we're touching upon, you know, whether we can have that at the level of physical economy is one thing, but in the work culture, and the infrastructure of this social change space, there really needs to be strong boundaries that allow for this renewal to happen. And for this and for this tapping into intelligence. I think Theory U by Otto Sharma does kind of approaches a process that acknowledges this, you know, in the sense that it guides people to the bottom of the U where there's a source of inspiration and then it tries to institutionalize that in policies or structures and processes as a team. But it's because we're always operating out of the legacy of the wider work culture. You know, I'm the first person to say that, like, I just don't make time for that because the, you know, I was in a men's circle during the week and I was just like, fuck, like, I'm always in pain, you know, if I really turn into my body back, my neck isn't my back is like, but I will always choose the productivity hit, then resting and caring for my body, you know, now that's really, really sad. But that is the that is the truth of this. 

And I remember when I first got into systems change Say, I think it's the Berkana Institute to come up with art and posting things facilitation methods. And they had done a lot of development of theory and practice in the space, which at the time was like, really, really new. And they, I think after seven years, it said, Okay, well, we're now going to observe the natural cycle and the seventh year is a fallow year, I mean, we're all going to stop and make sense of where we are in our lives and what's needed next. And I think that that is incredibly, incredibly wise and mature and beautiful. 

And, you know, to try and introduce this culture is so necessary, you know, again, it's, so just to loop around, this is the setting of our own plot. We have our own subplot in the story, which is to usher in meta-modernism. in which a systems change. But we're also bound by the setting that we're not conscious of. And one of the one of the settings that shapes both of our lives and the lives of people listening is very unhealthy work culture that actually puts us in unintelligent states. And that I think a really key question for everyone listening and for us is how do we, how do we become aware of the setting and then change it? Like, I'm even thinking about that in the context of funders, you know, where, obviously, we're trying to get funding for Alter Ego. And I, finding myself playing out a scarcity mindset in terms of the money that I asked for. I find myself you know, I had a call with a funder, and luckily, we have a good enough relationship for me to begin by saying, I'm burnt out and I need to take most of August and a little bit of September look either like, you know, really enlightened and forward thinking and they're like, Yeah, of course. You know, Like, kind of we all are, who isn't? You know?

And so I think that, you know, in a way, when I think about like the contribution of initiatives like Alter Ego, they're doing this network building. Yeah, there's like a real virtue and agenda setting and in, you know, downloading the new metamodern theory, but actually, that's very important work to do in creating, healing, restorative spaces, and introducing good work culture that is allows us to be honest for the long haul. 

Daniel Thorson  58:32  
Yeah, and enjoying ... Right. Like, that's it that strikes me this should be fun. It should be. It can be like some of the experiences I had occupy were literally the most fun things I've ever done in my life, because it was not just like, the fun of going to a movie or something. It was the fun of being deeply aligned with that which you know, is good and beautiful. And then like acting in concert with other people. I'm happy about that. It's like deep fun. Like, that's really fun. And so I think there's so much. Yeah.

Ronan Herrington  59:08  
Yeah. Oh, just agreeing with you. It's like what? What a radical idea. Let's have an absolute ball while we're trying to bring about a new paradigm. And like a key part of that is really, to not take ourselves too seriously. It was one of the core principles of the second gathering was like, This is too serious to take ourselves too seriously. And this, this idea of like, to kind of be fun. And I think that like, in a way for me, if I'm being really honest, I lost my joy for this, because I'm burnt out. And I really, I really hope that by taking a break, I can find my joy and I'm able to hold this lightly. You know, it's like, one of the principles of meta modernism is that is the naive sincerity and to return to God like You know, what are the chances of this happening? I don't really know. But let's give it a go. You know, let's just try our best and have a good time. So yeah, I'm really I would really love that for myself. 

Daniel Thorson  1:00:11  
Yeah. And I noticed that that that has been something to the degree that I can access it seems largely based on how regular and disciplined I am about my meditation practice. And I think like the amount of time I've spent meditating, I think you have also spent time in like a monastic setting. You know, I spent at 4 years total and kind of meditation spaces like intensive meditation spaces and just learning thoroughly the emptiness of phenomena, like, gives you this sense of 'it's all a game,' you know, it is at the end of the day a game and so why not enjoy it? You know, why not enjoy it? And if and if you're not enjoying it, then that's a signal that you know, something you're not like, maybe ..Take us. I mean, not like you should enjoy every moment. But if the joy is gone, then that's sort of a message I think. 

Ronan Herrington  1:01:11  
Yeah, absolutely. Yeah, it's obviously a message that I do not listen to..

Daniel Thorson  1:01:15  
Welll me either!  In the story you were saying.. is like asking, or telling funders that you're gonna take some time off. I think there's a way in which we are kind of deconstructing, and building a new culture, in those kinds of interactions, like I experienced that often with the people that I work with, where I'm like, nervous about saying something like, Hey, I can't make it to this thing, you know, and I need to spend a day in silence. And I tell them that and they're just like, Oh, great, you know, go and do it. And and I feel a kind of burden dropping off of my shoulders because I had projected onto them that they are going to judge me for not being a good worker bee but it's just these embedded cultural stories that I think as people who are doing this work like we are on the frontlines and really trying to, you know, they say it kind of decolonialize ourselves.

Ronan Herrington  1:02:10  
Hmm. Yeah, absolutely.

Daniel Thorson  1:02:14  
Curious, you know, when that happened for you, that you started seeing yourself or identifying less as a mainstream progressive and what that transformation has.. what the ramifications of the impacts of that transformation have been. 

Ronan Herrington  1:02:34  
It's in process, and it's one of the things that probably is one of the major sources of anxiety, which is that this project started as a left wing classically activist project that was the circus that we were in and still are in. And the idea was that left wing politics is failing. It needs a you know, insulin injection of spirituality to revive it and what's interesting is that when you go into, particularly developmental thinking, but the thing is an important thing to say is that Alter Ego started as you know, 'we need to connect spirituality and politics.' 

But it was only then that we discovered the broader field of developmental thinking, integral theory, spiral dynamics and eventually meta modernism as a kind of a broader political framework that houses those ideas. And all of them talked about a journey from first tier thinking, which is thinking that 'your worldview is correct, and if only everyone thought like you, the world would be better,' to second tier thinking, which is a way of seeing the world where people's worldviews are developmentally informed and are valid from that developmental perspective. And the work isn't too you know, defeat one worldview with another. It's too to create states to integrate them, and to find the healthy expression of them, and to bring harmony between them. 

This is one of the core aspects of meta modernism is that, you know, pre modernism, modernism, post modernism, all of them are worldviews that are corresponds to levels of psychological development. And so if you have a meta modern level, you have a, say, a level of cognitive complexity that allows you to apprehend more perspectives and perspectives that are missing from the debate like debate like marginalized groups, and that corresponds at universal values. And, and yet, there is a trap within that thinking that you are unwilling to accommodate people who don't think like and so the key shift to measure modern thinking is, is integrating the yes and universal values. We need to Take into account for these perspectives, be aware of power dynamics. So we also have to be aware of a contradiction when we dismiss and exclude or shame and, you know, dismiss as deplorable people who do not think like us, and that actual true solidarity, is solidarity with perspectives that are even different from your own. Now, it's, it's very, the thing that I'm struggling with is that it's easy to say in practice or in theory, but in practice, you know, where does your discernment about where we should go then leave? You know, are you left in this kind of mad relativism where everyone is correct? 

And I think the thing that I'm struggling with maybe is that as I you know, appreciates you know, more conservative views and the blingee of them obviously, Jonathan Haidt, the moral psychologist his book, 'The Righteous Mind' would talk about the moral foundations of the left and right. And from his inquiry, he would say, I can't really say that the left is more right than the right. So both of them just have different ways of seeing the world. And it's actually about trying to bring them into some degree of accommodation and harmony. And that is very difficult pill to swallow. If you're in a classic left wing circle, and you see the dominance of right wing ideas. And I think I struggle emotionally with it because it feels like a betrayal of my tribe. And I fear the rejection of that tribe. So as a very as maybe as an example, to ground this dilemma. 

You know, in the Alter Ego community, we've been really fixated and fascinated by Jordan Peterson, who is, you know, at a depth, psychology level, you know, reintegrating our religious myths, foundations, and bringing a very strong narrative of spiritual, and psychological growth. He's like, basically mainstreamed Shadow Work. It's like a really incredible contribution. And it's very profound. And yet, he says a lot of things in public that we really feel quite odious to kind of people from the progressive background and it's a as something feels off about that. And, and yes, we don't want to reject him outright. We want to be able to say yes, and or we want to be able to integrate the good of Jordan Peterson and then transcend it with progressive values and progressive perspective. So the last thing I we're doing in the first season of videos is a series where we compare and contrast the Russell Brand and Jordan Peterson and a range of issues and trying to figure out what another modern synthesis looks like. And I'm really, genuinely afraid of putting myself out there and someone who's passively endorsing Peterson because I feel like I get hammered by my friends who are, you know, really in the intersection of activism and identity politics, and, and so it's a very, it's a it's very strange I feel I find myself in a great, existentially confusing place where I still can broadly agree with progressive values and progressive policies, and yet feel like I need to be trying to integrate other perspectives. 

And so I'm going to be honest, I'm a bit lost, which is quite difficult than when you have to run a, you know, upstanding political organization that is convening people around the new agenda and you're like, no clue where we're going. But then I also do you know, there's also like, there's also, you know, a clear sense that we need to tackle the environment and tackle alienation and then tackle inequality and the need to promote and developmental culture. But when it comes to things like intersectionality, and identity politics, I'm more confused. You know, this is really strong criticisms of those that I am sympathetic. 

Daniel Thorson  1:09:10  
But yeah, I mean, there's so much that comes up for me and hearing you say that one is for so long I thought like, we'll know that we've made it to a new kind of politics when we have leaders who can admit to not know. I mean, in America at least, you know, if you change your mind you that's a that's a negative, even if it's for good reason, you know, you called a flopper or something else. And just how ridiculous that is. And then differentiated .. and I never had this thought before until you you were speaking about Jordan Peterson and the right is, you know, can be differentiate between the kind of perhaps corrupted expression of the moral Psychology of the right, and the underlying kind of adaptive moral system. Right? Like there's some way in which really beautiful intention for protection and security and clarity and making appropriate boundaries gets turned into, like, yeah, at least in America, like just the crazy shit but like does not make sense and so can we on the one hand say no to that with very strong clarity, while also welcoming in the kind of underlying insights and clarity is that the the minds of the people not in power but who look are somehow implicated in that power, are holding.

Ronan Herrington  1:10:57  
I think that's so spot on. I think that we're really missing is a very strong, progressive politics that is inclusive of all the Moral Sentiments and is able to say no to that wall. But yes, I honor your need for order and sanctity and security. And actually, this more complex solution is how you achieve that. And I think that the, it's the, you know, we often talk about politics in greater depth and complexity that we need to have a leadership that can be in that area of depth to really name, the emotion and, and the emotional needs, that comes with a particular endorsing that particular policy. But say no to, you know, frankly, fucked up expression of it, or, you know, or if I'm being kind of suboptimal expression. And so I think that's a very interesting way of approaching it. And also To recognize that the same equally applies to the left, but there's some really beauty and validity in values like fairness, and then they find a corrupted expression in, you know, literally, you know, like, you know, cultures of dependency in dysfunctional welfare states, for example. 

And I think that, again, the space that hasn't been tried is the fallible space. It's a space where we can come together and really acknowledge the failures of the past of the left and the right. And also the uncertainty about where to go. I mean, that's, you know, in a way I've been thinking about, like, how do we compete with the drama of, of mainstream politics, because it is a classically, plot-driven drama of good guys as bad guys, there's conflicts. And I think that It is the somehow the it's a different kind of drama when people are more vulnerable and more acknowledging of uncertainty and you are almost required to participate in it in order to work. And potentially a representative soundbite media driven system just isn't capable of that. And again, that's an example of where the setting cannot support the new plot, and therefore we have to reinvent the setting. 

You know, and there's obviously one of the missing the Metamoderna's Six New Forms of Politics is a democratization politics that actually facilitates co-development within (the) conversation. 

Daniel Thorson  1:13:44  
Thank you, Ronan. And this conversation has been just so wonderful. I appreciate the mirror that you are to me, and the vulnerability that I see you bringing to every space that I hear you It's inspiring. And it's something that I am endeavoring to embody more of in my own life and you're helping me do that. 

Ronan Herrington  1:14:07  
Thank you so much. Yeah, it's been a really beautiful conversation and it's been nice to just acknowledge what's going on for me right now. You know and to and to know the best part of us all making sense of progress.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
